docs / alerting / fundamentals / templates (#86983)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/alerting/fundamentals/notifications/templates.md

- **Alert notification**: When an alert rule condition is met, Alertmanager sends a notification to various channels such as Slack, Grafana OnCall, etc. These notifications can include information from the labels associated with the alerting rule. For example, if an alert triggers due to high CPU usage on a specific server, the notification message can include details like server name (instance label), disk usage percentage, and the threshold that was exceeded.

## Labels and annotations

Labels and annotations contain information about an alert. Labels are used to differentiate an alert from all other alerts, while annotations are used to add additional information to an existing alert.

### Template labels

Label templates are applied in the alert rule itself (i.e. in the Configure labels and notifications section of an alert).

{{<admonition type="note">}}

> Think about templating labels when you need to improve or change how alerts are uniquely identified. This is especially helpful if the labels you get from your query aren't detailed enough. Keep in mind that, it's better to keep long sentences for summaries and descriptions. Also, avoid using the query's value in labels because it might cause Grafana to create many alerts when you actually only need one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Think about templating labels when you need to improve or change how alerts are uniquely identified. This is especially helpful if the labels you get from your query aren't detailed enough. Keep in mind that it's better to keep long sentences for summaries and descriptions. Also, avoid using the query's value in labels because it may result in the creation of many alerts when you actually only need one.
```

        CPU usage for {{ index $labels "instance" }} has exceeded 80% for the last 5 minutes: {{ index $values "A" }}

  And it would print:

        CPU usage for instance1 has exceeded 80% for the last 5 minutes: 81.2345

### Template annotations

Both labels and annotations have the same structure: a set of named values; however their intended uses are different. The purpose of annotations is to add additional information to existing alerts.

There are a number of suggested annotations in Grafana such as `description`, `summary`, `runbook_url`, `dashboardUId` and `panelId`. Like labels, annotations must have a name, and their value can contain a combination of text and template code that is evaluated when an alert is fired.

Here is an example of templating an annotation in the context of an alert rule. The text/template is added into the Add annotations section.

        CPU usage for {{ index $labels "instance" }} has exceeded 80% for the last 5 minutes

The outcome of this template would print

        CPU usage for Instance 1 has exceeded 80% for the last 5 minutes

> ### Notification templates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Template notifications
```

> **Notification templates** represent the alternative approach to templating designed for reusing templates. Notifications are messages to inform users about events or conditions triggered by alerts. You can create reusable notification templates to customize the content and format of alert notifications. Variables, labels, or other context-specific details can be added to the templates to dynamically insert information like metric values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notification templates represent the alternative approach to templating designed for reusing templates. Notifications are messages to inform users about events or conditions triggered by alerts. You can create reusable notification templates to customize the content and format of alert notifications. Variables, labels, or other context-specific details can be added to the templates to dynamically insert information like metric values.
```

> Here is the example of a notification template:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of a notification template:
```

```go
{ define "alerts.message" -}}
{{ if .Alerts.Firing -}}
{{ len .Alerts.Firing }} firing alert(s)
{{ template "alerts.summarize" .Alerts.Firing }}
{{- end }}
{{- if .Alerts.Resolved -}}
{{ len .Alerts.Resolved }} resolved alert(s)
{{ template "alerts.summarize" .Alerts.Resolved }}
{{- end }}
{{- end }}

{{ define "alerts.summarize" -}}
{{ range . -}}
- {{ index .Annotations "summary" }}
{{ end }}
{{ end }}
```

> The message you would receive in your contact point:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the message you would receive in your contact point:
```
